[DPE-7734] [DPE-7786] Add tuning docs and migration guide (#128)
canonical/charmed-etcd-operator: docs/how-to/migrate-to-charmed-etcd.md

# How To migrate to charmed etcd

> This guide outlines the steps required to migrate an existing etcd to charmed etcd.

Reviewer: Perhaps:
```suggestion
This guide outlines the steps required to migrate an existing etcd cluster to a charmed etcd one.
```

Reviewer 2: Agree with most of this, I'd just suggest a small change:

```suggestion
This guide outlines the steps required to migrate an existing etcd cluster to a charmed etcd cluster.
```

Sounds redundant to say "cluster" twice, but ensures complete clarity.

Author: done

## Prerequisites

- a Juju VM controller with a model
- TLS Provider deployed to that model, in our case we use `self-signed-certificates` (see [](tls/enable-tls.md))
- Object Storage Provider deployed to that model, in our case we use `s3-integrator` (see [](backup-and-restore/configure-object-storage-provider.md))

> - your existing etcd cluster must be at least of version 3.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A juju VM controller with a model
- A TLS Provider deployed to that model, in our case we use `self-signed-certificates` (see [](tls/enable-tls.md))
- An Object Storage Provider deployed to that model, in our case we use `s3-integrator` (see [](backup-and-restore/configure-object-storage-provider.md))
- Your existing etcd cluster must be at least of version 3.0
```

Author: done

> ## Migration Guide
> 
> Migrating to charmed etcd includes the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Summary

These are the steps you will need to follow to migrate to charmed etcd:
```

I normally prefer to stay away from summaries that directly map to the steps (since the page has a table of contents on the side already), but in this case I feel it could be useful for the user to mentally prepare.

When adding summaries like this, we normally have them as independent sections (like the Prerequisites) - so I'd also change the rest of the migration steps from H3 to H2 headings

Author: Has been updated. That was exactly my intention, nice that we agree on it :)

> - create a backup of your existing cluster

Reviewer: Lines starting with a capital letter

Author: done

> - upload the backup to object storage

Reviewer: Perhaps:
```suggestion
- upload the backup to an object storage (s3-compatible or Azure blob storage)
```

(suggestion applies to the subsequent titles)

- deploy charmed etcd

> - integrate charmed etcd with object storage provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- integrate charmed etcd with an object storage provider
```

(suggestion applies to the subsequent titles)

Author: done

> - integrate charmed etcd with TLS provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- integrate charmed etcd with a TLS provider
```

(suggestion applies to the subsequent titles)

Author: done

> - optional: apply cluster credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [_optional_]: apply cluster credentials
```

(suggestion applies to the subsequent titles)

Author: done

- restore the backup to charmed etcd
- switch your application over to charmed etcd

### Create a backup

> Migrating your existing etcd cluster to charmed etcd happens via backup and restore. First, create a backup of your

Reviewer: I think we should have a line break before `First,`

Author: done

existing etcd cluster. The following command is an example for a snap-based installation of [etcd](https://snapcraft.io/etcd)
in version `3.4.36`. It connects to etcd via `localhost` and creates a backup file called `etcd-backup.db` in the current

> working directory:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Migrating your existing etcd cluster to charmed etcd happens via backup and restore. 

First, create a backup of your existing etcd cluster. The following command is an example for a snap-based installation of [etcd](https://snapcraft.io/etcd)
in version `3.4.36`. It connects to etcd via `localhost` and creates a backup file called `etcd-backup.db` in the current
working directory:
```

I think it's good practice to have instructions start on a new line. Makes the page more reliably skimmable.

Author: done

```text
etcdctl snapshot save etcd-backup.db
```

This will prompt the following output (or similar):

> ```text

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will prompt the following output (or similar):

```text
```

Author: done

{"level":"info","ts":"2025-08-01T08:15:52.738103Z","caller":"clientv3/maintenance.go:220","msg":"completed snapshot read; closing"}
{"level":"info","ts":1754036152.7385268,"caller":"snapshot/v3_snapshot.go:142","msg":"fetched snapshot","endpoint":"127.0.0.1:2379","size":"20 kB","took":0.003674558}
{"level":"info","ts":1754036152.738597,"caller":"snapshot/v3_snapshot.go:152","msg":"saved","path":"etcd-backup.db"}
Snapshot saved at etcd-backup.db
```

### Upload the backup to object storage

For restoring backup files, charmed etcd supports S3-compatible (for example AWS, GCS, MinIO or MicroCeph) or Azure 
object storage. In our example, we upload the backup file that we just created to S3-storage by using the `S3cmd` tool.

If not yet installed, execute the following command to install `S3cmd`:

```text
sudo apt-get install s3cmd
```

Ensure the bucket for uploading your backup file exists (replace the placeholders with your credentials). In this case
we want to use a bucket called `etcd-backups-test-bucket`:

```text
s3cmd ls s3://etcd-backups-test-bucket/ --access_key=<your-access-key> --secret_key=<your-secret>
```

> You should see your bucket listing all available directories:
> ```text

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should see your bucket listing all available directories:

```text
```

Author: done

> DIR  s3://etcd-backups-test-bucket/etcd-backups/

Reviewer: is `DIR` a placeholder?

Author: No, it's part of the output of the `s3cmd` command.

```

If the storage bucket you want to use does not exist yet, create a bucket `etcd-backups` with the following command 
(replace the placeholders with your credentials):

```text
s3cmd mb s3://etcd-backups-test-bucket/ --access_key=<your-access-key> --secret_key=<your-secret>
```

> With the following command, you can upload the backup file `etcd-backup.db` to the just created bucket 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the following command, you can upload the backup file `etcd-backup.db` to the newly created bucket 
```

Author: done

self-signed-certificates           active      1  self-signed-certificates  1/stable  317  no       

Unit                         Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports     Message
charmed-etcd/0*              active    idle   0        10.143.229.222  2379/tcp  
charmed-etcd/1               active    idle   1        10.143.229.119  2379/tcp  
charmed-etcd/2               active    idle   2        10.143.229.81   2379/tcp  
s3-integrator/0*             active    idle   4        10.143.229.157            
self-signed-certificates/0*  active    idle   3        10.143.229.160
```

### Integrate with object storage provider

After charmed etcd has been deployed, integrate it with the deployed object storage provider to provide access 
the object storage. In our case, this happens with `s3-integrator` over the `s3-credentials` interface.

Run the following command:

```text
juju integrate s3-integrator charmed-etcd
```

```{caution}
Ensure s3-integrator is configured correctly. Please refer to [](backup-and-restore/configure-object-storage-provider.md) for more information.
```

> Shortly after the relation between them should be established:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shortly after, the relation between them should be established:
```

Author: done

```text
Model          Controller      Cloud/Region         Version  SLA          Timestamp
backend-store  dev-controller  localhost/localhost  3.6.5    unsupported  08:38:22Z

App                       Version  Status  Scale  Charm                     Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
charmed-etcd                       active      3  charmed-etcd              3.6/edge   68  no       
s3-integrator                      active      1  s3-integrator             1/stable  145  no       
self-signed-certificates           active      1  self-signed-certificates  1/stable  317  no       

Unit                         Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports     Message
charmed-etcd/0*              active    idle   0        10.143.229.222  2379/tcp  
charmed-etcd/1               active    idle   1        10.143.229.119  2379/tcp  
charmed-etcd/2               active    idle   2        10.143.229.81   2379/tcp  
s3-integrator/0*             active    idle   4        10.143.229.157            
self-signed-certificates/0*  active    idle   3        10.143.229.160            

> 

Reviewer 2: Since nothing else has changed, could we remove this part of the example output and just leave the relations?

Author: done

```

Charmed etcd will enable peer TLS on all units with a rolling restart. After a few moments, the relation should be 
established and charmed etcd should be settled again:

```text
Model          Controller      Cloud/Region         Version  SLA          Timestamp
backend-store  dev-controller  localhost/localhost  3.6.5    unsupported  08:46:21Z

App                       Version  Status  Scale  Charm                     Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
charmed-etcd                       active      3  charmed-etcd              3.6/edge   68  no       
s3-integrator                      active      1  s3-integrator             1/stable  145  no       
self-signed-certificates           active      1  self-signed-certificates  1/stable  317  no       

Unit                         Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports     Message
charmed-etcd/0*              active    idle   0        10.143.229.222  2379/tcp  
charmed-etcd/1               active    idle   1        10.143.229.119  2379/tcp  
charmed-etcd/2               active    idle   2        10.143.229.81   2379/tcp  
s3-integrator/0*             active    idle   4        10.143.229.157            

> self-signed-certificates/0*  active    idle   3        10.143.229.160            

Reviewer 2: Same as above - could we just leave the relations?

Author: done

self-signed-certificates:certificates  charmed-etcd:peer-certificates     tls-certificates     regular  
```

### Optional: apply cluster credentials to charmed etcd

If your previous etcd cluster did not have authentication enabled, this step can be skipped.

If your previous etcd cluster uses authentication, it is required to apply the password of the `admin` user to charmed etcd.
Otherwise, restoring the backup will fail.

First, create a Juju secret with the admin password. Run the following command to create a secret called `etcd-credentials`,
 replacing the placeholder with your correct admin password:

```text
juju add-secret etcd-credentials root=<your-admin-password>
```

Take a note on the prompted secret URI, as this will later be configured to charmed etcd:

```text
secret:d268gfktvobctdg3loe0
```

Now allow charmed etcd access to this secret by running `juju grant-secret etcd-credentials charmed-etcd`.

Next step is to configure the secret to charmed etcd. Run the following command, replacing the secret URI with the one 
you noted earlier:

```text
juju config charmed-etcd system-users=secret:<your-secret-URI>
```

> After a few moments, charmed etcd will have updated the credentials internally. Check the status:

Reviewer 2: What are we looking for in the status to check that the credentials finished updating?

Author: While updating, it says `(config_changed)`. Once done, it's `active/idle` again.

Author: I've updated the text to make that clearer.

backend-store  dev-controller  localhost/localhost  3.6.5    unsupported  09:34:57Z

App                       Version  Status       Scale  Charm                     Channel   Rev  Exposed  Message
charmed-etcd                       maintenance      3  charmed-etcd              3.6/edge   68  no       Database restore is in progress
s3-integrator                      active           1  s3-integrator             1/stable  145  no       
self-signed-certificates           active           1  self-signed-certificates  1/stable  317  no       

Unit                         Workload     Agent      Machine  Public address  Ports     Message
charmed-etcd/0*              maintenance  executing  0        10.143.229.222  2379/tcp  Database restore is in progress
charmed-etcd/1               maintenance  executing  1        10.143.229.119  2379/tcp  Database restore is in progress
charmed-etcd/2               maintenance  executing  2        10.143.229.81   2379/tcp  Database restore is in progress
s3-integrator/0*             active       idle       4        10.143.229.157            
self-signed-certificates/0*  active       idle       3        10.143.229.160            
```

> After the restore was completed, the status will be `active/idle` again:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the restore is complete, the status will be `active/idle` again:
```

Author: done
